QueryGarden
===========

Growing healythy applications in fertile SQL.


Many software packages within the OHDSI ecosystem rely on SQL query
generation, which is fraught with security risks and compatibility
issues. We introduce an ahead of time query server, QueryGarden, to
enable access to queries over HTTP to reduce the risk of SQL injection
attacks, improve the lifecycle management of analytical queries and
provide both batch processing for training analytics models as well as
single patient queries for near real time applications. The Query Garden
is a place to plant queries for analytics that grow into stable, secure,
and user friendly applications.

This software has been presented at the OHDSI Symposium as research software.
<!-- For more details click [here](/ohdsi.html). -->


## Introduction

The OHDSI software ecosystems uses queries as the primary method for
storing business logic of health data analysis. ETL into the OMOP CDN
\[1\] is performed primarily by ingesting data from CSV files into a set
of staging tables that are then transformed by issuing SQL queries to
load the data into production tables. ATLAS \[2\] uses a human friendly
web editor for generating SQL queries as cohort definitions. Achilles
uses a collection of SQL queries to determine the data quality of an
OMOP database, while the PatientLevelPrediction R package uses SQL
queries to define the features that will be extracted for making
personalized predictions for patients. All these tools have in common
the need for SQL query generation that is beyond the power of standard
query parameterization. Data driven applications need to leverage
databases in order to guarantee availability and persistence of data.
The OHDSI ecosystem has wisely standardized on a set of SQL relational
database (RDBMS) systems to use when constructing these applications.
However, the management of these queries is not sufficient to meet the
diverse and complex needs of the OHDSI community.

Most software applications include a database application layer for
storing and retrieving data and executing queries. For these
applications the needs of Create, Read, Update, Delete (CRUD) are
sufficient. Since the servers and clients written for these applications
would prefer a database independent programming interface, they
typically use an object-relational mapping (ORM \[3\]) which translates
between the schema of the database and the objects of programming
language used to manipulate these databases. The primary benefit of
these ORM tools is the cross-platform, database independence and easy of
use gained by programming against the native interface of objects or
structures in the programming language. The ORM library handles the
conversion of application code into SQL statements to perform the CRUD
tasks. The primary drawback to these tools is their limitations with
respect to the analytical capabilities of the SQL languages. Not all ORM
tools provide access to the entirety of the SQL language for a
particular RDBMS. So when performing analytical queries, the application
must handle all of the complexity of raw SQL embedded in their
application, which is precisely what they were trying to avoid with ORM
tools in the first place. The OHDSI applications such as
PatientLevelPrediction require the power of raw SQL queries in order to
efficiently compute the patient features needed for the application.
Most ORM tools will not be sufficient for the analytical applications in
the OHDSI ecosystem.

One reason that SQL queries are hard to manage for the OHDSI community
is that the OMOP CDM has a large degree of variability. There are
multiple versions of the CDM with variable table and schema names. These
properties along with heterogeneity in the CDM prevent the use of
standard SQL parameters for most queries. SQL query parameters are
designed to maximize security and prevent the injection of malicious SQL
as parameters passed from user facing code. This security first design
means that the structure of the query cannot be changed as a parameter
and thus many of the changes required by the OMOP CDM cannot be
performed. OHDSI/SQLRender tool handles this problem using a runtime
manipulation of strings with a custom DSL for generating queries.
However, this approach leads to security vulnerabilities and inefficient
execution.

The Query Garden approach combines query generation with SQL query
parameters to avoid SQL injection vulnerabilities by generating the
queries as a resource that is deployed with the application and accessed
at run-time. These queries are specified using a standard templating
language such as Jinja, Mustaches or the Go standard text templates and
filled in at deployment time with all of the structure modifying changes
that cannot be done with SQL query parameters. The queries can contain
query parameters that are substituted at run-time. The variable values
are specified in a YAML \[4\] document that associates with each key a
string value that will be replaced in the query. This YAML document
includes scopes which are collections of variables that are used when
instantiating a template. This design allows for reuse of templates
across many queries, which reduces maintenance costs. The queries are
also stored as templates and scopes as files on disk which enables them
to be tracked in version control. By tracking the scopes and templates
separately, the administrator of a Query Garden based service can easily
verify changes to the queries for security risks. Before deploying an
application that uses the queries, the scopes and templates are combined
to form the rendered queries. These rendered queries are also saved to
disk for manual inspection. At this point they are plain SQL queries
(with query parameters) that can be analyzed using any existing tool for
static or dynamic analysis of SQL queries, for example query plans can
be created using the EXPLAIN or ANALYZE keywords in an RDBMS GUI client.
The ability to profile SQL queries outside of the application that uses
them is important for benchmarking and optimizing the queries. Once the
queries have been rendered, they can be deployed as static resources
with the application that uses them. This relieves the application from
depending on any particular method for generating queries, which
enhances interoperability as any tool that exports queries can be used
with any application that requires them. For example clinical experts
can construct queries using ATLAS which can be deployed along with
queries exported by a computational phenotyping tool.

The Query Garden approach is designed to meet the needs of an
application for near real time patient level prediction. The models need
to be trained using queries that operate on cohorts and then deployed
using queries that operate on patients. This requires many queries, one
per feature of the feature matrix as well as a scalable system for
managing these queries. Since the cohort level and patient level queries
need to share many parameters, the templates and scopes are shared
between them. Clinical experts can enter new queries by writing
templates or scopes to add new features. Development and maintenance of
this application are greatly aided by a simple system for statically
generating the queries.

## Conclusion

In conclusion, the Query Garden approach for statically rendered queries
enables secure, interoperable deployment of analytical queries. This
approach is complementary to an ORM based approach for building
applications that depend on business logic in the form of simple
database queries. Separating the construction of the queries from their
integration into applications allows for better debugging, profiling,
and auditing of the queries and can improve the performance and security
of many OHDSI applications.

## References

1.  OHDSI/CommonDataModel contributors. OMOP CDM specification
    > https://github.com/OHDSI/CommonDataModel/

2.  OHDSI contributors. OHDSI list of analytics tools
    > https://www.ohdsi.org/analytic-tools/

3.  Maria E Orlowska, Hui Li, Chengfei Liu. On Integration of Relational
    > and Object-Oriented Database Systems SOFSEM 1997: SOFSEM'97:
    > Theory and Practice of Informatics pp 295-312

4.  Oren Ben-Kiki, Clark Evans, Ingy dÃ¶t Net, The YAML Specification,
    > [*http://yaml.org/spec/*](http://yaml.org/spec/) 2009


